After reviewing the health claims data of the first quarter of 2025,
you have said that
Sir, we have come to know which
health insurance company is performing well at present,
but this is not the complete picture.  It is
possible that only this quarter of a company has been
good.  Then I
asked you through a poll, should I
present to you the claims data for the latest financial year 2024-25?  So you
said that Sir, if this claims data is not for one year but for at least three
years, then we will be
able to understand clearly which health
insurance company is consistently performing well
and on that basis only we can take a decision.
Your opinion matters a lot to me
and hence I have collected
health claims data of 15 insurance companies
for you and this data is of
last 3 years from 2022 to 2025.
This data is
taken from the public disclosure documents of insurance companies which
are listed on their websites and
they also submit the same data to IRDA.  In today's
video, you will not only get to know
five very important
metrics and ratios of these insurance companies, but
I am also going to rank these companies from best to worst for you
so that you can actually
know which companies are
performing well and which
companies need to improve.  So,
if you want to know, apart from the noise of social media, through data-
based insights,
which health insurance company is the best and is
consistently performing well, then today
's video is going to give you complete clarity.
Before you get
lost in the data further in this video with me.  Don't
forget to subscribe to the channel.  Let's quickly
start this video.  So friends, these are the
15 companies whose data we are going to review today.
13 companies were there in the previous video
also.  I have added two new companies here.
Reliance and Acco had requested
that Sir, we also need the data of these companies.  So let me
show you this data for 2022-23.  There
are total 15 companies here.  I have extracted the claims data for 2022, 23, 2023, 24 and 2024-25
from the public disclosure documents of each of the companies.  It took me around two weeks.
Daily I used to give two to three hours to this
data.  Only then so much data has been
collected.  And after collecting this data,
I understand one more thing.  It
is very difficult to understand this.  This
is very confusing.  And the common policy holder will
not understand anything in this.
So to make this data easier to understand,
I have created a template for you.   In
which I will feed all this data
and after that I am going to show you each metric and all the
rankings in it.
Here the
names of all the insurance companies appear in the data entry section.  The five
metrics that we have are claim settlement
ratio, I have
fed the data of all three years here.  Data on Claim Spade Ratio, Incurred
Claim Ratio, Solvency Margin,
Complaints is entered here.  And
it will automatically calculate the average here,
what is the average ratio of 3 years, what is the average
amount, it will calculate it here.
Currently that data is not uploaded in it.
Once I upload that data.
After that we will review the data of all the companies.
Now the data of all those 15 companies for all
three years has been uploaded here.  All
five of our ratios, figures and
metrics have come here
and the average of all of them has also been calculated.  But
if you look at this page, it
is very difficult to understand it even here.  Only this average has
come out.  We don't know anything special from this.
So first of all we will go to metric analysis.
Here are the five metrics
we're going to review for these companies today.
Claim Settlement Ratio, Claims Paid
Ratio, Incurred Claim Ratio, Solvency
Margin Complaints per 10,000 claims.  In addition to
explaining the ratios for each metric,
I'll also explain why they're
important and what the data here shows.
After reviewing these five metrics,
I will also show you a performance heat map to show
which company is
performing well in which field.  We will discuss where
improvement is needed and the overall score as
well.  And in the final step,
we are going to rank these companies.
We will rank them based on their scores on these five metrics
so that we can identify the top three or five
companies and find out
which are the worst performing companies.  And
I will also tell you what weightage formula I have used for this ranking.
So let's start with the claim settlement ratio.
Claim settlement ratio means
that out of 100 claims filed
by the policy holder with the company, how many
claims were settled by the company.  That means it
gives us an idea of ​​the quantity of claim settled.  But how many claims out of 100 have been
settled by the company?  So the top performer
here is Aditya Birla whose
average claim settlement ratio is approximately 96%.
You may
also see an arrow in front of this percentage.  This means that
this company has been consistently performing at this average for the
last three years
because this is the three-year average.  The 100
shown here is its score
because this company performed very well
so it got a score of 100 which we will
use for ranking.  HDFC
Ergo has a claim settlement ratio of 96.45, which
means that very good claims are being settled
and it is also consistent and
it has got a full score of 100.  Next comes the
company New India with a score of 98.91 out of 100.
After this, Nivapa's health insurance companies
Manipal, Cigna, Bajaj, ACO Oriental
all have above 90% claim settlement ratio.  Now
you can also see some green arrows
going up the sides.  So this
tells us what the trend is for the last 3 years
?  These companies have been improving
their claim settlement ratios over the last three years
and you can also see the scores here.
What are some companies that have below 90 claim settlement?
Star Health Insurance, ICICI LBRD, SBI,
General National, Tata, AIG and Reliance have a
claim settlement below 90 and are
also given scores.
How are these companies performing?   The
second ratio we will look at is the claims paid
ratio.  Now it is possible that a company may be
settling 95-96 out of 100 claims but a lot of
money is being deducted
from the claims.  The claims paid ratio tells us how much money the company pays when a claim of ₹100 is filed.
So it is also important to know
whether the number of claims settled is good and whether the
company is paying a good amount of money or
not.  So the top performer here is National
Insurance with a
claims paid ratio of 95.63.  Claims of ₹100 were
filed, out of which ₹9596 were
paid by National Insurance.  After that comes Bajaj General
Insurance.  When a claim of ₹100 was filed in health insurance,
₹93 was
paid out of it.  This is the average of 3 years and this is also a
consistent trend.  That is why he
got a score of 95.  We have given the score above 9500
here.  SBI General also has above 90
claims paid ratio.
They are giving more than 90 rupees out of 100.  Reliance
also has a claims paid ratio of more than 85.
Then come those companies which are making high
deductions or claim rejections.
Claims of ₹100 were sought.  Care Health
Insurance gave ₹83.  HDFCO has 82, Tata
AIG has 83, Acco has 81, Aitya Birla has
78, Oriental and New India have a
ratio of more than 100.  But then
why is it so negative?  See, if any company is
giving more claims than the one asked for,
it means that there is some interest or penalty
component in it and this is not good for the
financial health of the company or the overall
insurance business model of the company.
That is why we have
kept it in negative for giving more claims than asked for.
That is why their scoring is also accordingly.
Neema Bhupa has paid ₹73 out of 100.
Star Health ₹70 ICICI Lombard
₹68 Manipal Cigna only ₹61.5 The
amount not paid by the company here
includes both deductions from claims and rejected claims.
Third comes our ratio, the Incurred Claims
Ratio.  How much claim have these companies given in return for the money they have
taken from the policy holders in these three years
?
That is, which company is being stingy in giving claims
and which company is settling the
fair claims even after charging less premium,
we will know this through the Incurred Claim
Ratio.  So the ideal incurred
claim ratio range is 75 to 85 which is
for good performers.  If it is more than 85, it starts
causing loss to the company
and if it is less than 75, then
it becomes a little bad for the policy holders.
So we have kept that healthy range.
Healthy range does not mean highest which
is good for the health of both the policy
holders and the insurance company.  So the
top performer in Incurred Claim Ratio is ICICI
LBRD with a scoring of 100 and it is also improving to
83.79 as it is
within the healthy range.  The incurred claim ratio of Tata IIG
is 75%, Aitya Birla is 73% and that
of HDFC Ago is 86%.  It is very good but
why has it got a scoring of 90?
Because it is more than 85.  Somewhere or the other the
company will also keep its margin.  If the company has
operational expenses, it has a
negative impact somewhere.  Bajaj
Ali's score is also above 85, so
it has been given a scoring of 86.26 accordingly.  Some
companies have very little.  Star Health
Insurance has 67.5.  Manipal Signa has
68, Acco has 68, SBI General has 92.08.  They are making a lot of
claims but are
not selling that many policies.  So this
incurred claim ratio will somewhere or the other have a negative
impact on the company.  So
we have scored it accordingly.  Care Health
Insurance has only 61%, Reliance has 96%,
Oriental has more than 100%.  That means
they are not getting as much money as they are
claiming.  So it has a negative impact on the overall
health of the company and its overall sustainability.
Now if
you look at these government companies,
both the claims paid ratio and the incurred claims ratio are
high.  That is why they have capping
policies.  There are submissions.  But still the
premiums are quite high.  Because
these companies are giving a lot of money
as claims.  Despite being an expensive policy, there are
supplements and capping within the policies.
National's is 96.30.
All three government companies are on the higher side.
Nivapa's lowest is 58.56.
If the average of all three years is taken, then the
lowest incurred claim ratio is of Nevapa.   That
means Nevapa is giving the lowest claims in proportion to the policy money being taken.
Solvency margin will tell us
how is the financial health of the company?
How is the financial situation?  Do they have money or not?  So the
benchmark of IRDA for this is
1.5 times.  That means,
if they have promised to give sum insured of ₹100 to the policy holders
through policy contracts, then they should always have ₹150.
We have given a scoring of 100% to companies whose solvency margin is more than two times.
So these
companies include Neema Bupa, Star HL, ICIC LBR, Aitya Birl, Bajaj General Insurance, SBI General, Acco whose solvency
margin is more than two.  That means comfortable
funds are available with them.  After that, some of the
companies which are satisfactory are K,
HDFC, Tata, AIG, New India.  Their
benchmark of 1.5 is above that.  But there are two
companies whose performance is negative or less than the benchmark.
That is Oriental and National.  Both
are public sector companies.  The rest of the ratios are
also a bit off.  So the effect of that thing
is visible here also.  But the
solvency margin of most companies is decent.  That means he has sufficient
liquid funds with him.
Final and fifth matriculation comes
10,000 claims on complaints.  That is, when 10,000 claims were
filed,
how many complaints were filed against which company and these complaints are
related only to the claims.  So, the data of stand-
alone health insurance companies which
deal only in health insurance was
directly mentioned.  But
for the general insurance companies, the
method we have used is the
percentage of their health
claims out of the total claims.  Suppose
100 claims are filed
in general insurance companies across all categories.  Out of that, let's say 50% of the
claims were for health insurance.  Out
of 100 claims, 50 were for health insurance.   Of the
20 complaints received, we considered 10 complaints to be related to
health insurance.  That is,
we have considered the complaints in the same ratio in which the health insurance claims were.
Bajaj has the least complaints.  Total is the
average of 3 years.  There are only three complaints against 10,000 claims.
You will also
see scoring accordingly and this
is the consistent performance of the top four companies.
So here the companies are consistently
performing well and these are the average complaints of three years.
Reliance is at second place.
Oriental has only eight complaints.
New India has five complaints.
Companies with more than 10 complaints see their
scoring slightly lower.  ICIC
LBRD has 11 complaints.  Aditya Birla 19
complaints you can say.  HDFC Acco also has
11 complaints.  Tata AIG has 11 complaints.
Assuming 19 complaints of ACO,
in the rounded figures, Manipal Cigna 23.33
means that the companies whose average complaints
are more than 20, their scoring gets further reduced
because the
industry average number of
complaints is around 22 to 25 but there are some companies whose
complaints are very high like Neema Bupa
42.67
i.e. 43 complaints,
Average Care Health has 42 complaints and
Star Health has 52 complaints in the last three years.   There
are complaints.  These are complaints related to claims, the
average data of the last three years, which
I have just shown you here.
Now in metering analysis,
we saw ratio wise how each company is performing ratio wise.
Now we see the performance heat
map where we have done three color
coding.  If any column is in green
then it means that the company is
performing well within that ratio.  If it
is yellow then it is an average performance.  But there
is still scope for improvement in this.  This can be
improved further.  But if there
is a red column then that needs improvement.
These companies have a lot of work to do there.
So here are the names of insurance companies.
These are the total five ratios and at the
end I am also showing the overall score
which they have achieved.   The
marks they got in each matriculation have
also been added here.  Let's
start with First Insurance Company
Nevapa.  The claim settlement ratio is very good.  The
claims paid ratio is quite low.
This company is giving only ₹73 out of 100.
Which should be improved.  The incurred
claim ratio is one of the lowest in the
industry at 58.56, which means the amount of money it is
taking from the policyholder is quite high.   The
ratio of claims being given in return is
very low.  The solvency is excellent at 2.42%, the
company has enough money.  The number of
complaints is also high.  These
should be improved.  The overall score is 59.5.
Next comes Star Health Insurance.   The
claim settlement ratio is 85.13.  Ideally, the
company's
claim settlement ratio should be above 90.  That is why it
needs improvement.  The claims paid ratio is also
only 70.  If ₹100 is asked for, then claims of ₹30 are
either being rejected or that
money is being deducted.  This is too much.
Incident Claim Ratio This is the average.   There may be
improvement in this.  If it goes above
7075 then it may be better.   There is
no problem with the solvency margin.
Complaints are the highest in the industry.  There
are 52 complaints.
This is the average of the last three years.  And the overall score
of Star Health is 57.8%.
Next Comes Care Health Insurance.   The
claim settlement ratio of 93.34
is excellent.  The claims paid ratio is good at 83.52.
But if it gets better, it will be even
better.  Incident Claim Ratio of 61.45.  This is where the
company needs to improve.
This incurred claim ratio is quite low.
Solvency margin is above benchmark and
complaints are also very high.  There
are 42 complaints.  The overall score is 69.8.  Now comes
ICICI LBD.  The claim settlement ratio is
not satisfactory at all.  86.39 should be at
least 90%.  We
expect this from such a good brand.
And the most shocking thing is their claims paid
ratio.  When a claim of ₹100 was asked for, they were
paying only ₹68.
Meaning there is no deduction from every claim.  There was
rejection as well as deduction in this.   All
other metrics including incurred claim ratio,
solvency and complaints are
satisfactory.  A lot of improvements will have to be made in just these two data.  The
next company is
Aditya Birla.  Excellent claim settlement ratio of ₹96%.  The
claims paid ratio
is slightly low.  Just ₹78 you are paying on ₹100
of claim.  The
incurred claims ratio of 73.41 is very good.
Solvency margins are excellent and
complaints are also below industry average.
If the industry average comes out to be 22-24, then
these are 19 complaints against them and 10,000
claims.  His overall score is 84.  HDFCO is
one of the most reputed
health insurance companies in the
country with a
claim settlement ratio of 96.45%.  It
is very good.  Claims paid ratio may improve a little more.  It
is 82%.
If it reaches above 85 and 90 then it will be
called satisfactory.
Incident Claim Ratio of 86.58%.  So, of course, the company is
not getting that much premium but it is
settling the claims well.  The solvency
margin is 1.89.  This is OK and there are only
11 complaints but 10,000 claims.  This is the
average of the last three years.  The overall score
comes out to be 86.3.  Manipal Singhna 91 has a
good claim settlement ratio.  But what has
disappointed me here is their claims
paid ratio.  Even in the first quarter of 2025,
their claims paid ratio was not good.  There
is also an average of 3 years.
This company is giving only 61% i.e. ₹61 when asked for ₹100.  There
is also scope for improvement in the incurred claims ratio.  Solvency margin of 68.48
is above benchmark and complaints are around industry average.  There is
more than enough company too.
23.33.  The overall score is 67.5.  Next
comes Bajaj General Insurance.  The only
company with all five metrics that are excellent.
Claim settlement ratio of 94%,
claims paid ratio of 93%. If ₹100 was asked for,
claims of ₹93 were paid by Bajaj General.  The
Unresolved Claims Ratio of 86 is excellent and the
solvency margin of 3.55 is the highest in the industry.
This is a three-year average
and is the average of complaints of the last three years.  There are
only three complaints but 10,000
claims.  The overall score is 94.8 Tata AIG
claim settlement ratio is 84%.
Not good.  Claims paid ratio could be better.  The
average we will say is 83%.   The
incurred claims ratio is in the healthy range of 75.
So the solvency margin is good.
Complaints are also very less.  There have been only 11
complaints in the last three years.  The overall
score is 77.8.
I would say this data is much better than what Tata showed in the first quarter of 2025.
Next comes SBI General.  The claim
settlement ratio is not good.  The claims
paid ratio is very good.  That means the number of
claims that are being settled is
not a good number.  But the money being paid is
quite good.  Their incurred claim
ratio is negative.  But this
is negative on the higher side.  This is causing some damage to the company.
Therefore, here it
needs to be reduced a little so that it can
come in an ideal range.  Solvency margin is
excellent at two times and complaints are also
around the industry average.  There are approximately 21
complaints.  This is the average of the last three years
and their total score is 82.3.
Talking about Reliance, their claim
settlement ratio is 83%.  Not good.   The
claims paid ratio is rather good.
Their claims paid ratio is 85-86%.   There could be a
little more improvement.  But this will be
called a good claims paid ratio.   The
incurred claims ratio is negative on the higher side.
That means the company is giving claims as per the amount it is taking.
Claims are being received
but it is
not able to sell many policies.  Is able to collect less premium.
So this is negative on the higher side.  The
solvency margin
is also borderline.  The guideline is 1.5 times
but they have a margin of 1.6 times.
This can also be improved.
Complaints are very few.  There are only four
complaints and their overall score is 74.3
Acco is a very small insurance company.
But I included it because I received your request.  There
is a claim settlement ratio of 93%.  It is very good.  Claims paid
ratio is slightly low.  It can be improved.   The
incurred claim ratio is quite low.
Solvency margins are excellent and
complaints are also around the industry average.
His overall score is 82.3%.
Now friends, come all three public sector
companies, government companies.  Talking about Oriental Insurance, the
claim settlement ratio is
very good.  The claims paid ratio
is negative because it is more than 100.  The
unclaimed claim ratio is also negative, above 100,
and the solvency margin is
even lower than the benchmark.  Complaints
are low though.  There are only eight complaints.
I would give an overall score of 67.  New India
Assurance Claim Settlement 99% This is the three year
average.  Claims paid ratio of 105%
is good for policy holders but
overall its impact will be visible on your pricing.
Policies will become expensive with supplements
and cappings.  The incurred claim ratio is 104%, which
means the premium is not coming in as much as the
claims being made.
This will create problems in their overall financial health.   Has a
solvency margin of 1.86%.  This
is good.  The only government company which is
in positive and has only five complaints.  The
overall score is 77.  The last
insurance company is National Insurance, a
general insurance company.  There
is a claim settlement ratio of 90%.  It is satisfactory, it
is average.  The claims paid ratio is excellent at
95.63.  That means this company is paying a good amount of money.
But the incurred claim ratio is 96.30.
This is negative, on the higher side it is not less.  Is
too much.  And the solvency margin is
negative.  There are 23 complaints.  This
is the industry average.  They have 23 to 25 complaints, which is
equal to the industry average.  The
overall score is 70.8%.
Now we have also done metric wise analysis as to where each
company stands in which metric
and we have also seen the performance heat map to see
where each company
needs improvement.  Now friends,
we will rank these companies score wise.
We will rank which company comes in the top three or five companies and which company is at the last.  So
what do we have to do to get ranked?
Whatever score these companies have got for each metric,
we have to give them each metric wise and
ratio wise weightage.  That is,
how much weightage should each ratio have
in this ranking.  So in that, first of all we have given
25% weightage to the claim settlement ratio.  Suppose a company has a claim
settlement ratio score of 100 and
we have given it a weightage of 25%.  So
25 points will be added to their ranking points.
Similarly, we have given 25% weightage to the claims paid ratio, i.e., how much money the
policy holders have received.
Whoever scores 100 here will get
25 points added to his ranking.  The
third weightage we have given is
10,000 claims on complaints.  We have given its weightage as
20%.  That means if someone
scores 100 then 20 marks will be added to their ranking.
These are the three metrics for which
we have kept the highest ranking.  Because the
claim settlement ratio will tell us the
most.  Who is settling the number of claims
?  Claims paid ratio tells us
which company is paying the most money and
complaints mean
which company has the best customer experience.
25%, 25% and 20%.  Overall, 70% of the
allocation we have made in this ranking is
based on customer experience.  That means 70% of the
weightage of this ranking goes to customer
experience.  Number of claims settled plus
amount of claims paid plus least
complaint average of insurance companies.  If we
add these three, the weightage becomes 70%.
We have given 15% weightage to Incurred Claim
Ratio and 15% weightage
to Solvency Margin because these 30% are important
for the financial and overall sustainability and overall health of the insurance company.
So now friends, I have come to the ranking
page and we will start from the sixth rank.  The
company which is at sixth rank
in the overall score according to this weightage
is Tata AIG whose score is 77.8 i.e. you
can say 78.  New India Insurance is at seventh position.
His score is 77.
I will show you the top five and top three companies.
But first let's look at the average and lower
ranking companies.
ICICI LBRD has a score of 74.3.
ICICI LBRD is at number eight.  Scoring is 74.3.
Reliance is at number nine.  The score
is 74.3.  This is a tie for eighth and ninth rank.
National Insurance is at 10th position with 70.8%
Care Health Insurance is at 11th position.   The
overall score is 69.8.  Manipal Cigna comes in at
number 12 with a score of 67.5.
Oriental Insurance is at number 13.
His overall score is 67.  Neem Bhupa comes
on 14th.  The score is 59.5.  Overall Customer
Experience.  Number of claims settled and
amount of claims paid.  Apart from this, Star
Health comes at 15th position with 57.8.
Now friends, let us come to which company comes at number five
?
Friends, Ekko General Insurance is at number five, that is,
their health insurance claim settlement is
at number five, as per the data.
However, the size of the company is still very small.  The
claim amount is very low.  But
still, according to our scoring, their
ranking is fifth.
SBI General is at fourth position.  Look at settling claims,
giving money, complaints.   If we
add the incurred claim ratio and solvency margin, the score is 82.3.   There
is actually a tie between the fourth and fifth positions.  Aditya Birla comes at third place.
His overall score is 84.
Which company will be at number two and first?
Can you guess and tell?
Tell us now by commenting which company is at second position
and which company is at first position.
I hope you know which
two companies are yet to be named.  So
I am going to reveal the second best
health insurance company based on claims
data of past three years from 2022 to
25 and that company is HDFC Ergo.  The overall
score is 86.3% and it
comes second.  The claims paid ratio is slightly low.  That
means the deduction in money or the claim
rejection is affecting the amount.
Otherwise, the company's overall metrics are excellent.  The
solvency ratio is also slightly low.
Friends, at number one is Bajaj General
Insurance.  In terms of health insurance, the
overall score is 94.8% and there is a
huge gap with those at the second position.   That
means this company is performing brilliantly in every respect.
Now my personal
opinion may be with the lower three or
five companies that these companies are good.
But the data tells us
where each company stands in terms of claims
and how it is performing.  This data has
cleared many of our doubts.
Many things have been clarified
and we have been given a picture of claims all over India for the last three
years.  So
our top performers are Bajaj, HDFC Ago and
Aitya Birla. Which companies
need to improve?  Star Health Insurance,
NVUPA Oriental have the lowest scores
in this overall ranking.  Maybe
my opinion speaks well of some other company.
But only claims data will tell the complete truth about how a
company is actually
performing.  Now friends,
I am going to tell you three very important things related to this data.  First of all,
this
data only includes health insurance
claims.  Any personal
accident claim or travel insurance
data is not included in it.  Only
these three
things are included in the data of complaints because
I did not find their segregation distribution anywhere.
So, the complaints data
includes all three policies and complaints claims – health, travel and personal accidental.  Apart from this,
whatever data is there is only health insurance
claims data.  Personal accidental and
travel insurance are not included in it.
Secondly, we have
taken all this data from the websites of insurance companies.
We have shown you the data here by taking the average of 3 years from their public disclosure document and for easy understanding.
And the third and last point is that this
ranking that I have shown you is
not in any way a policy buying advice in any sense.  I have just
told you what the data says.  There are data
based insights.  How is each company
performing?  I have
tried to tell you this through this data.  Now
I already have this claims data.  Why
not use it more?
In the next video, I will tell you what market share
each company has in providing health claims.
Which company is
giving claims worth how many crores of rupees and
what is its percentage market share.  Would you
like to watch this video?  If yes, then
subscribe to the channel and
press the notification bell so that you will
definitely get the notification of the next video.
Before ending the video,
I would like to tell you one last thing that it has taken
me a lot of time and hard work to collect this data and do research.
So will you
keep this information to yourself?  I have also shared this data and insights with you.
So you should also share this with your family,
relatives and friends
so that they can also become smart policy holders like you.
I am Harvinder Singh, I will meet
you in the next video.  Till then take
care, stay fit and stay healthy.  Jai Hind.